title: Hackerspace in Vancouver
date: 2009-8-21
files: vhs.jpg

The [Vancouver Python User Group](http://vanpyz.org/) (VanPyZ) lost its meeting
space. [Workspace](http://www.abetterplacetowork.com/) hosted most of our
2008/2009 meetings. It is closing on Friday August 21st. Looking for another
place, someone on the VanPyZ [mailling
list](http://lists.livingcode.org/listinfo.cgi/vanpyz-livingcode.org/) suggested
to contact the Vancouver Hackerspace (VHS). After looking at the
[website](http://vancouver.hackspace.ca/), I went to see what it was.

VHS is a room managed by a group of hackers in a democratic way. This community
consists of software & hardware hackers. You pay a small membership fee to
access the place: $25 for a *basic* one, or $50 for a full time access with a
key. It’s a place where you can work on your hobby projects and socialize with
other like-minded hackers.

<img class='right' with='250' height='180' src='vhs.jpg'>

I attended the chat/talk on Git Thursday evening. People were easy going and
knew their subject. I was sceptic when I first heard of ‘Hacker spaces’, it
sounded like an utopian idea; nice in theory but not manageable in practice.
After of few hours in this microcosm, I changed my mind. Hacker space is not
just a neat idea, it works. Staying at home working on own project alone is not
the best way to go. Hacker spaces provide a social environment where you can
take you’re creativity to another level. People exchange ideas, help each
other, or spread the latest tech gossips. There are tutorials, where you can
learn by doing; and more classic talks.

VHS is worth checking if you’re living in Vancouver. If not for the space, at
least for the people.
